---
layout: post
comments: true
title: Welcome!
categories: [general]
tags: []
fullview: true
---

#### Welcome to my blog!

If you've found this page, you likely already know who I am, but on
the chance that you don't, I'm a graduate student in Slavic
Linguistics, with a strong interest in Digital Humanities.

With this blog, I hope to:

* *Hold myself accountable:* I'm entirely self-taught when it comes
  to programming, and find that putting my code on a public site like
  this one forces me to adhere more closely to best coding practices.
* *Record the development of scripts and ideas:* As my coding skills
  improve, the scripts I write are getting more and more complex, and
  they require more careful planning ahead of the actual coding
  process. I hope that this blog will serve as a 'white paper' of
  sorts, laying out my reasoning and helping others (and me!) to
  understand just what this code is doing.
* *Participate more in the open-source community:* I've been
  interested in open-source software for several years now, but I've
  always been a consumer of open-source software rather than a
  producer. It's my intent to make available small pieces of software
  through this site and in doing so take a more proactive role in the
  open-source community.


Here's a test code snippet, just to practice syntax highlighting:  
{% highlight python linenos %}
def save_results(any_list, title):
        """Save a list in a text file."""
        # generate a file name for the saved list of diminutive stems
        file_name = title + '.txt'
        # write the list of diminutive stems to that file
        with codecs.open(file_name, "w", encoding="utf8") as stream:
            for item in any_list:
                stream.write("%s \\\\ \n\n" % item)
{% endhighlight %}


#### What sort of content can you expect to find here, anyway?

I've been struck by the relative scarcity of Russian text-analysis
tools in comparision to the abundance of such tools for English. Even
simple text-analysis tasks, such as removing high-frequency words from
a given text (before creating a word cloud, for instance), are made
difficult when working with Russian text. If such basic tasks are
difficult, more complex text-analysis tasks are made that much more
difficult.

I hope on this blog to contribute some small pieces of text-analysis
software and hopefully take a small step towards addressing these
deficiencies.




<a href="POST_URL#disqus_thread"></a>
