---
layout: post-light-feature
title: Making Sense of Ablaut Patterns in Balto-Slavic Verbs
description: "Which groups of verbs participate in zero-grade lengthening? The answer is awfully difficult to determine."
categories: [blog, Balto-Slavic Iteratives, Slavic, aspect] 
date: 2015-02-04
comments: true
image: 
        feature: soft-trees.jpg
---

In the [last post][lastp] on the topic, we met two groups of Slavic verbs which form secondary imperfectives with the suffix <span class="russ">-а(й)-</span> (<span class="trans">-a(j)-</span>) and lengthened zero-grade root vocalism. One group, which we'll call the <span class="ocs">бьрати</span> (<span class="trans">bĭrati</span>) type, shows inherited e-grade vocalism in the present tense, e.g., 1sg <span class="ocs">берѫ</span> (<span class="trans">berǫ</span>), while the other group, which we'll call the <span class="ocs">умрѣти</span> (<span class="trans">umrěti</span>) type, shows zero-grade vocalism in the present tense, e.g., 1sg <span class="ocs">мьрѫ</span> (<span class="trans">mĭrǫ</span>).

In Old Church Slavic, the oldest attested Slavic language, the <span class="ocs">бьрати</span> (<span class="trans">bĭrati</span>) type includes four attested verbs, <span class="ocs">бьрати</span> type (<span class="trans">bĭrati</span>) 'gather', <span class="ocs">дьрати</span> (<span class="trans">dĭrati</span>) 'scrape, strip, flay', <span class="ocs">пьрати</span> type (<span class="trans">pĭrati</span>) 'lift, support', and <span class="ocs">гънати</span> type (<span class="trans">gŭnati</span>) 'drive, chase' (this verb has an unexpected consonant alternation in the present tense, e.g. 1sg <span class="ocs">женѫ</span> type [<span class="trans">ženǫ</span>]). We might also add <span class="ocs">\*сьрати</span> type (<span class="trans">\*sĭrati</span>) 'shit' to this class—it's not attested in the OCS canon, but can be reconstructed fairly confidently from modern Slavic comparative data (the asterisk indicates a reconstructed form).

The <span class="ocs">мрѣти</span> (<span class="trans">mrěti</span>) type includes seven verbs, <span class="ocs">мрѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">mrěti</span>) 'die', <span class="ocs">врѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">vrěti</span>) 'slide', <span class="ocs">жрѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">žrěti</span>) 'swallow', <span class="ocs">нрѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">nrěti</span>) 'submerge', <span class="ocs">прѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">prěti</span>) 'lean', <span class="ocs">ра</span>(<span class="ocs">ꙁ</span>)<span class="ocs">скврѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">ra(z)skvrěti</span>) 'besmirch', and <span class="ocs">стрѣти</span> type (<span class="trans">strěti</span>) 'spread'. Like the first group, the boundaries of the <span class="ocs">мрѣти</span> (<span class="trans">mrěti</span>) type might be stretched a little farther: we might think about including <span class="ocs">врѣщи</span> (<span class="trans">vrěšti</span>) 'throw', for instance. But for now, let's leave these two groups as stated.

There are a few individual verbs which are well-attested and interesting to the present discussion, including <span class="ocs">зъвати, зовѫ</span> (<span class="trans">zŭvati, zovǫ</span>) 'call', <span class="ocs">жещи, жегѫ/жьгѫ</span> (<span class="trans">žešti, žegǫ/žĭgǫ</span>) 'burn', and <span class="ocs">жьдати, жидѫ/жьдѫ</span> (<span class="trans">žĭdati, židǫ/žĭdǫ</span>) 'wait'. We'll take up these unique verbs in more detail in a later post.

For now, I'd like to point out one relationship between the above two groups of verbs, the <span class="ocs">бьрати, берѫ</span> (<span class="trans">bĭrati, berǫ</span>) type and the <span class="ocs">мрѣти, мьрǫ</span> (<span class="trans">mrěti, mĭrǫ</span>) type. The former has e-grade vocalism in the present tense, while the latter has zero-grade. If you've been paying very close attention, you might have noticed that the reverse seems to be true in the infinitive, and if so, you'd be right.

Verbs in Old Church Slavic are generally analyzed as having two stems from which verbal forms are built: a *present stem*, from which are formed the present tense, the imperative, the present active participle, and the present passive participle, and an *infinitive stem*, from which are formed the infinitive, the supine, the imperfect, the aorist, the past active participle (in two flavors), and the past passive participle. (The infinitive and the supine are two forms of verbal noun, and the imperfect and the aorist are two different past tenses—understanding the particular meanings of all these forms isn't necessary for the present discussion.)

Old Church Slavic preferred open syllables (which end in a vowel) to closed syllables (which end in a consonant) to the point that syllables were frequently restructured or truncated to fit the open-syllable type. One change which took place in many words was metathesis and lengthening, whereby a short vowel would trade places with a following /r/ and become lengthened in the processes. That is, the inherited sequence <span class="trans">\*-er-</span> became <span class="trans">\*-rě-</span>. To put it another way, the infinitive <span class="trans">mrěti</span> 'die' reflects earlier <span class="trans">\*mer-ti</span>. With that in mind, it's easy to see that the <span class="ocs">бьрати, берѫ</span> (<span class="trans">bĭrati, berǫ</span>) type and the <span class="ocs">мрѣти, мьрѫ</span> (<span class="trans">mrěti, mĭrǫ</span>) type are exact opposites, at least in their vocalism. The former has an e-grade present stem and a zero-grade infinitive stem, while the latter has a zero-grade present stem and an e-grade infinitive stem.

These two groups of verbs are starting to have a lot in common. In the next post, we'll look at some of the verbs which don't fit so neatly into either the <span class="ocs">бьрати</span> (<span class="trans">bĭrati</span>) type or the <span class="ocs">мрѣти</span> (<span class="trans">mrěti</span>) type.

[lastp]: {{ site.canonical }}/blog/balto-slavic%20iteratives/slavic/aspect/Lengthened-Grade-Imperfectives/
