---
layout: blog
categories: [blog, personal]
comments: true
title: Welcome
---

One of my main goals in writing this blog is to be more open about my research. There are
two projects I'm working at the moment which are independent of my
present coursework (although each began as a term paper), and each is
large enough in scope that the endpoint isn't anywhere in sight yet. I
hope that blogging will both allow me to create a meaningful record of the
research *process* as well as disseminate my research to a broader
audience than I might otherwise be able to reach.

The first of those two projects, which will likely receive the greater
attention on this blog, concerns the rise of verbal aspect in the
Slavic languages. I'm specifically interested in the relationship
between iterativity and imperfectivity, as among the morphological
markers of the imperfective in modern Slavic languages, the most
ancient forms seem to have origins in an iterative suffix. The
evolution of Slavic aspect has been the subject of a great deal of
research, but much of that research is concentrated on aspectual
prefixes. I hope to shed more light on the suffixes and suprasegmental
features which play a role in the rise of aspect in Slavic.

The second project concerns verbal aspect in Tohono O'odham, an
Uto-Aztecan language spoken in what is today southern Arizona and
northern Sonora, Mexico. As in the Slavic languages, in O'odham verbs
occur in two aspects, the perfective and imperfective. Traditional
analyses analyze the (longer) imperfective form of the verb as basic,
with the (shorter) perfective form derived through a truncation
process in which the final segment (typically one consonant, but
sometimes more material) is lost. However, there is a glaring lack of
research on the way that verbal aspect is actually used in speech. I
hope to bring knowledge from the long Russian aspectological tradition
to bear on this topic. Perhaps these two systems of verbal aspect
function more similarly than has been realized.

Aside from these larger research projects, this blog will likely also
include writing on open access, digital humanities, language, and
literature. Stay tuned!


This should be Russian text: <span class="russ">брать</span>
